[Latency](Glossary#latency) is the time required for [communication](Glossary#communication). Information moves at a speed not greater than the [speed of light](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_of_light) and therefore latency cannot be eliminated.

Different distances between [miners](Glossary#miner) implies [announcements](Glossary#announcement) will be known to some before others. While a miner remains unaware of an announcement he wastes capital [grinding](Glossary#grind) on a [weak](Glossary#weak) [candidate](Glossary#candidate). As more time passes it becomes exponentially less likely that the miner will be [rewarded](Glossary#reward) for the candidate. Miners therefore compete to see announcements before other miners, as this reduces [opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost).

If we were to disperse miners with equal [hash rate](Glossary#hash-rate) at equidistant points around the Earth they would experience the same average latency. Yet due to the financial benefit of reduced latency, they would tend to move closer to each other. Miners obtain a premium on returns for [aggregating](Glossary#aggregation).

This proximity-based [pooling pressure](Pooling-Pressure-Risk) is a consequence of the linear [block](Glossary#block) ordering required by [consensus rules](Glossary#consensus-rules). **Bitcoin prescribes winner-take-all ordering, which produces disproportionate opportunity cost.** The [variance discount](Variance-Discount-Flaw) is another pooling pressure caused by [consensus](Glossary#consensus).

The [defense](Axiom-of-Resistance) that Bitcoin *intends* to raise is [market](Glossary#market) defense against anti-market (state) forces. To do this [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) must be distributed broadly among [people](Glossary#person) so that it becomes difficult to [co-opt](Glossary#co-option). However pooling pressures inherent in the [consensus](Glossary#consensus) work against this objective. As such the characteristic is termed a flaw, though no way to eliminate the flaw has been discovered.

