[Variance](Glossary#variance) is the varying frequency of achieving a [reward](Glossary#reward). Variance is inherent to the probabilistic nature of mining and cannot be eliminated.

As a matter of [consensus](Glossary#consensus), different [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) among [miners](Glossary#miner) implies rewards will be earned by some more frequently than others. With 10% hash power one might expect to be rewarded 10 times more frequently than with 1%. Actual results are unpredictable and can vary significantly. But it is sufficient here in both cases to assume proportionality. In this example one miner receives a reward every 100 minutes and the other every 1000 minutes. Assuming identical rewards per [block](Glossary#block), the magnitude of the reward is also proportional to hash power.

Consider then that a tiny miner might have to wait years before any reward. There is also the possibility that a mine is misconfigured and can never succeed. Despite being rewarded proportionally, a smaller miner is faced with a deficiency in relation to the larger miner. It must improve [cash flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_cash_flow) to receive a fraction of the reward more frequently. For these reasons miners discount returns for variance. Smaller miners will convert their [mines](Glossary#mine) to [grinds](Glossary#grind) and pay an [aggregating](Glossary#aggregation) miner for reduced variance. Avoiding this aggregation is the rationale behind [P2Pool](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/P2Pool), but because distributed variance reduction is less efficient, [pooling](Glossary#pooling) dominates.

This variance-based [pooling pressure](Pooling-Pressure-Risk) is a consequence of singular [difficulty](Glossary#difficulty) as required by [consensus rules](Glossary#consensus-rules). **Small miners must compete at high difficulty despite low hash power, which magnifies inherent variance.** The [proximity premium](Proximity-Premium-Flaw) is another pooling pressure caused by [consensus](Glossary#consensus).

The [defense](Axiom-of-Resistance) that Bitcoin *intends* to raise is [market](Glossary#market) defense against anti-market (state) forces. To do this [hash power](Glossary#hash-power) must be distributed broadly among [people](Glossary#person) so that it becomes difficult to [co-opt](Glossary#co-option). However pooling pressures inherent in the [consensus](Glossary#consensus) work against this objective. As such the characteristic is termed a flaw, though no way to eliminate the flaw has been discovered.
